Column placeholder HLD (#1869)
ni/nimble: packages/nimble-components/src/table/specs/table-column-placeholder-hld.md

# Placeholders for table columns HLD

## Problem Statement

In some cases, an application may want to display a placeholder value in the table when a record does not have a value for a given field. The application should be able to customize that placeholder based on their needs.

## Links To Relevant Work Items and Reference Material

-   [Nimble issue 1538](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1538)
-   [Nimble issue 1511](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1511)

## Implementation / Design

### High-level behavior

There are two places where a value is displayed in the table that placeholders need to be considered: (1) in a cell and (2) in a group row. The cell placeholder will be configurable on each column that supports having a placeholder, and it will default to an empty string. The group row placeholder will come from the table's localization provider, and it will not be configurable through a column's API.

Placeholders within a cell will be rendered with nimble's placeholder font, which is currently 60% opacity of nimble's body font.

> Placeholders within a group row will have no special visual treatment.

Author: I think this is a question for @fredvisser and @NIbokeefe -- should a group row placeholder have special visual treatment to avoid ambiguity between "real" data and our placeholder?

As a note, I pulled the current statement from the requirements in #1538, specifically [this comment](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1538#issuecomment-1887951554):
>Should placeholder text be dimmed? Only in cells, but not group headers?
Yes, placeholder text should be dimmed (standard placeholder token value) in the data rows, but not in group headers.

![Placeholder text example](./spec-images/PlacholderText.png)

### Column-specific decisions

The exact behavior of placeholders in each existing table column is described below.

#### Text column

| Special-cased field values | Cell display                                                 | Group row display |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- |
| `undefined`                | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |
| `null`                     | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |
| `''`                       | \<empty cell>                                                | `"Empty"`         |

#### Anchor column

| Special-cased field values                          | Cell display                                                       | Group row display |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- |

> | Both label and href are `undefined` or `null`       | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured       | `"No alias"`      |

Author: The tricky thing is that (at least today) the grouping code can only look at one field in the record. Therefore, we can't make a distinction between the `undefined` label + `undefined` href case and the `undefined` label + defined href case when grouping. All of those values will get grouped together since we are grouping on the label.

> | Both label and href are `undefined` or `null`       | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured       | `"No alias"`      |

Reviewer: In the other comment I make the argument that having an undefined or null label with an href is not an application recommendation. If that actually makes sense then a well behaving app shouldn't be leveraging the case of (null/undefined label + href) and (null/undefined label + null/undefined href) at the same time. If that's convincing then we could just have the "No value" label and skip the "No Alias" label?

> | Both label and href are `undefined` or `null`       | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured       | `"No alias"`      |

Author: That makes sense to me, and it certainly simplifies things.

@fredvisser, any objection to getting rid of the "No alias" label? Instead, we would show "No value" any time the label is `undefined`/`null`, and we will recommend against ever having `undefined`, `null`, or empty labels associated with a defined href value.

> | Both label and href are `undefined` or `null`       | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured       | `"No alias"`      |

Author: @fredvisser, wanted to check that you had seen this conversation and see if you had any opinions.

> | Both label and href are `undefined` or `null`       | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured       | `"No alias"`      |

Reviewer 2: No objection to getting rid of the "No alias". Client apps should clean up their data, such that they don't have a URL with an empty label.

| Label is `undefined` or `null` with defined href    | href value is used as the link's href and the link's display value | `"No alias"`      |
| Label is defined with href of `undefined` or `null` | label as a plain string with no link                               | The label         |
| Label is `''` with any href                         | \<empty cell>                                                      | `"Empty"`         |

#### Number column

| Special-cased field values | Cell display                                                 | Group row display |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- |
| `undefined`                | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |
| `null`                     | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |

> 

Author: I've added some notes, but I wasn't entirely sure what to say about the special cases. Did you have anything in mind?

I also, didn't list that -0 and +0 shouldn't be used because I wasn't aware of any problems they would cause -- although -0, +0, and 0 all get treated identically, so maybe that's the note to make about those values?

#### Duration column

| Special-cased field values          | Cell display                                                 | Group row display  |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------ |
| `undefined`                         | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`       |
| `null`                              | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`       |
| Invalid value (e.g. `Number.NaN`)\* | \<empty cell>                                                | \<empty group row> |

\*This is considered invalid data from the table's perspective, and should be fixed within the client application.

#### Icon mapping column

The icon mapping column will not have a configuration for a placeholder.

| Special-cased field values | Cell display  | Group row display  |
| -------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| `undefined`                | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| `null`                     | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| Non-mapped value\*         | \<empty cell> | \<empty group row> |

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note saying custom group labels for a blank icon are handled in future work
- for example the idle state of a system may be represented as a blank icon. Today that would be using the undefined value and show as group label no value. In Future work a blank icon could map to the state "idle" and show as the group label.

| `undefined`                | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| `null`                     | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| Non-mapped value\*         | \<empty cell> | \<empty group row> |

\*This is considered invalid data from the table's perspective and should be fixed within the client application.

### Implementation plan

A column's placeholder will be stored as part of that column's `columnConfig` object. There will be no changes to the `TableColumn`, `ColumnInternals`, or `ColumnInternalsOptions` classes. The placeholder from the `columnConfig` object will be used by the cell views when rendering the cell.

We will create a placeholder mixin that adds the following to columns that chose to use it:

-   `placeholder` string property
-   `placeholder` attribute
-   abstract `placeholderChanged` function that will force columns using the mixin to implement `placeholderChanged` to update their column configuration

The columns that will be updated to use this mixin are:

-   TableColumnText
-   TableColumnAnchor
-   TableColumnNumberText
-   TableColumnDateText
-   TableColumnDurationText

### Localization

> All group row placeholder strings will be localized through the table's localization provider. Those strings are:

Reviewer 2: @ni/systemlink-pos @vpstoynova - When we group by a column that contains _empty_, _null_, or somehow _undefined_ values, the group row will have a friendly name (**No value**, **Empty**, or **No alias** - depending on the column datatype and the undefined value).

These group row friendly names can be overridden at the table level, but I expect we'll want to keep these consistent across applications, so I'd appreciate any feedback on these default values.

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me.

Reviewer 2: Talked with @TJ-G yesterday, and there are no concerns about these placeholder values.

# Placeholders for table columns HLD

## Problem Statement

In some cases, an application may want to display a placeholder value in the table when a record does not have a value for a given field. The application should be able to customize that placeholder based on their needs.

## Links To Relevant Work Items and Reference Material

-   [Nimble issue 1538](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1538)
-   [Nimble issue 1511](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1511)

## Implementation / Design

### High-level behavior

There are two places where a value is displayed in the table that placeholders need to be considered: (1) in a cell and (2) in a group row. The cell placeholder will be configurable on each column that supports having a placeholder, and it will default to an empty string. The group row placeholder will come from the table's localization provider, and it will not be configurable through a column's API.

Placeholders within a cell will be rendered with nimble's placeholder font, which is currently 60% opacity of nimble's body font.

Placeholders within a group row will have no special visual treatment.

> 

Reviewer 4: Some questions that I think I know the answer to but would be good to make explicit:
1. Will placeholders follow the same truncation behavior as cells and headers (... plus title)?
2. Will placeholders affect sort order?

-   Avoid mixing empty string with `undefined`/`null` as values for the label field. The distinction when grouping between `"No value"` and `"Empty"` is not likely meaningful to a user.
    -   As explained above, it is not recommended to use empty string, `undefined`, or `null` labels when the data has defined hrefs.

#### Number column

| Special-cased field values | Cell display                                                 | Group row display |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- |
| `undefined`                | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |
| `null`                     | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`      |

The alignment of the placeholder in the cell will match the alignment of the number in the column.

Column best practices:

-   Avoid mixing `undefined` and `null` as values for the same field. When grouping this will lead to two groups (one for `null` values and one for `undefined` values) that both have the text `"No value"`.

> -   Avoid using IEEE 754 special cases of `-Inf`, `+Inf`, `-0`, `+0`, and `NaN`.

Reviewer: oops sorry, forgot to actually have this comment submitted, minor

| `null`                              | column placeholder, or empty if no placeholder is configured | `"No value"`       |
| Invalid value (e.g. `Number.NaN`)\* | \<empty cell>                                                | \<empty group row> |

\*This is considered invalid data from the table's perspective and should be fixed within the client application.

Column best practices:

-   Avoid mixing `undefined` and `null` as values for the same field. When grouping this will lead to two groups (one for `null` values and one for `undefined` values) that both have the text `"No value"`.

#### Icon mapping column

The icon mapping column will not have a configuration for a placeholder.

| Special-cased field values | Cell display  | Group row display  |
| -------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| `undefined`                | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| `null`                     | \<empty cell> | `"No value"`       |
| Non-mapped value\*         | \<empty cell> | \<empty group row> |

\*This is considered invalid data from the table's perspective and should be fixed within the client application.

> In the future we can add the ability to create a mapping to a blank icon. This will allow a column to specify that it doesn't want an icon to be displayed in a cell for certain record values, but the column can still display an application-specified label on group rows.

Reviewer 4: Since #1874 is complete could you update this to be a current best practice and also delete the Future Work section below?

If an application wants to modify the value of a group row placeholder without this feature, they can do so through the localization provider.

### Allow different placeholders to be configured for each cell

We could add the ability to have different placeholders configured for each cell, but this poses a few different problems:

1. This would likely need to be a drastically different API, such as having the placeholder specified in the record. That would lead to quite a bit of duplicate information being set on the table, particularly when there are no use cases for this right now.
1. This would lead to a confusing state for the user because the placholder would be different for various rows, but all those rows would be in a single group.

A use case for different information being presented to the user for each cell will likely be solved by [a different feature to show cell-specific state](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/1776).

> ## Future Work

Reviewer 4: Anything we could do to help us think about placeholder support when we add new column types? For example,
to help us decide what to do for new columns we could add a section that records the philosophies you used to generate the column-specific guidance. Something like:
    - columns that display text should typically have a placeholder, columns that don't shouldn't
    - *whatever exception to the above that convinced us enum-text didn't need a placehoder*

If it's really use-case specific and not generalizable then feel free to reject this idea.

    -   Alternatively if the urls are not well-known structures, the application should explicitly provide the href as the label to keep unique labels and preserve grouping as opposed to using `null` / `undefined` labels.
-   Applications should avoid having duplicate labels to different hrefs as those are inaccessible to screen readers (and sighted users). See [high-level discussion](https://fae.disability.illinois.edu/rulesets/LINK_2/) of [aria SC 2.4.4](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/#link-purpose-in-context).
    -   For example, applications should avoid having `undefined` / `null` as the label as that causes multiple unrelated URLs to be grouped together under the group label "No value". Accessibility is okay as the full url will be shown but the value of grouping is limited.
    -   For example, if a label is missing, an application should avoid generating a non-unique label for multiple URLs (i.e. `Missing Notebook`) as that harms accessibility and limits the value of grouping.

> -   Avoid using empty string or other whitespaces labels with defined hrefs. This will cause the rendered anchor to have no text associated with it, and it will be difficult for a user to see that the anchor exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Avoid using empty string or other whitespace-only labels with defined hrefs. This will cause the rendered anchor to have no text associated with it, and it will be difficult for a user to see that the anchor exists.
```
